Python Basics Question and Answer
What is Python, and why is it popular?
Python is a high-level programming language known for its simplicity and readability. Just like we use Hindi language to communicate and express ourselves, Python is a language for computers to understand our instructions & perform tasks. Note: Python was created by Guido van Rossum in 1991.
Python is popular because it is easy to learn, versatile, and supported by powerful libraries and a huge community.
What is an interpreter in Python?
An interpreter in Python is a tool that reads your code and runs it line by line.
What are pre-defined keywords in Python
Pre-defined keywords are special words that Python already uses for its own rules, like if, for, and while. We cant use them as names for our own things.
Can keywords be used as variable names?
No we can't use keywords as variable names because Python already uses them
if = 5 # Not allowed age = 5 # Allowed
What is mutability in Python?
Mutability in Python means if object can changed after it is created or not
Why are lists mutable, but tuples are immutable
Lists are mutable because can change their items and tuples are immutable because can't change their items.
What is the difference between “==” and “is” operators in Python?
== checks if two things have same value and is checks they are the same object in memory.
What are logical operators in Python?
Logical operators in Python are words use to combine conditions like and, or, and not.
What is type casting in Python?
Type casting Python is changing a value from one type to another, like from number to string.
What is the difference between implicit and explicit type casting?
Implicit type casting happens automatically while explicit type casting is when we change the type on purpose
What is the purpose of conditional statements in Python
Conditional statements let the program make decisions and run code only if certain conditions are true.
How does the elif statement work?
The elif statement checks another condition if the first if is false.
What is the difference between for and while loops?
for loops run a set number of times, while while loops run as long as a condition is true.
Describe a scenario where a while loop is more suitable than a for loop?
A while loop is better when you don't know how many times you need to repeat something, like asking a user until they enter the right password.